ADR 35: Rosetta API Support (#7492)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-035-rosetta-api-support.md

> # ADR 035: Rosetta API support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# ADR 035: Rosetta API Support
```

## Context

Rosetta API, an open-source specification and set of tools developed by Coinbase, makes integration with blockchains simpler, faster, and more reliable by establishing a standard API for integrating blockchain applications.

By using a common interface that standardizes the process of how a user interacts with a blockchain, both the work of exchanges to integrate with new blockchains and also of the developers to build cross-blockchain applications such as block explorers, wallets and dApps is considerably reduced.

## Decision

> We think that providing Rosetta support to the Cosmos SDK will add value to all the developers and Cosmos SDK based chains in the ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We think that adding Rosetta API support to the Cosmos SDK will bring value to all the developers and Cosmos SDK based chains in the ecosystem.
```

3. Cost-efficiency: backporting features from `master` to the various stable branches of Cosmos SDK is a cost that needs to be reduced.

### Service

`Service` is a simple `struct` that is started and listens to the port specified in the options. This is meant to be used across all the Cosmos SDK versions that are actively supported.

The constructor follows:

`func New(options Options, network Network) (*Service, error)`

It accepts an `Options` `struct` that holds service configuration values, such as the port the service would be listening to:

```
type Options struct {
	Port uint32
}
```

The `Network` type holds network-specific properties (i.e. configuration values) and adapters. Ready-to-use Cosmos SDK release series-specific base `Network` concrete types will be made available. Applications can embed such types in their own custom types.

```
type Network struct {
	Properties rosetta.NetworkProperties
	Adapter    rosetta.Adapter
}
````

A `NetworkProperties` `struct` comprises basic values that are required by a Rosetta API `Service` to run:

```
type NetworkProperties struct {

> 	// Mandatory properties

Reviewer 2: You have listed mandatory properties, is it worth expanding on the optional properties?

	Blockchain          string
	Network             string
	AddrPrefix          string
	SupportedOperations []string
}
```

Rosetta API services use Blockchain and Network as identifiers, e.g. the developers of gaia, the application that powers the Cosmos Hub, may want to set those to Cosmos Hub and cosmos-hub-3 respectively.

`AddrPrefix` contains the network-specific address prefix. Cosmos SDK base implementations will default to `cosmos`, client applications are instructed that this should be changed according to their network configuration.

> `SupportedOperations` contains the transaction types that are supported by the library. At the present time, only `Transfer` is supported.

Reviewer 2: Obvious question is when will other transaction types be supported?

`Network` holds an `Adapter` reference too. Adapter implementations may vary across different Cosmos SDK release series:

```
type Adapter interface {
	DataAPI
	ConstructionAPI
}

type DataAPI interface {
	server.NetworkAPIServicer
	server.AccountAPIServicer
	server.MempoolAPIServicer
	server.BlockAPIServicer
	server.ConstructionAPIServicer
}

type ConstructionAPI interface {
	server.ConstructionAPIServicer
}

````

> ### Cosmos SDK Integration

Reviewer 2: I think this section is trying to explain how to use this new functionality. If so, should explain this at the start of this section.

> Cosmos SDK provides a base `Network` struct and a `NewNetwork` constructor that could serve as code example for client application developers and testing tool to be used in conjuction with `simd`.

Reviewer 2: May be me being a newbie, but it isn't quite clear how these different components would fit together. Could this sentence be simplified?

```
// NewNetwork returns the default application configuration.
func NewNetwork(options Options) service.Network {
	cosmosClient := cosmos.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.CosmosEndpoint))
	tendermintClient := tendermint.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.TendermintEndpoint))

	return service.Network{
		Properties: rosetta.NetworkProperties{
			Blockchain:          options.Blockchain,
			Network:             options.Network,
			SupportedOperations: []string{OperationTransfer},
		},
		Adapter: newAdapter(
			cosmosClient,
			tendermintClient,
			properties{
				Blockchain:  options.Blockchain,
				Network:     options.Network,
				AddrPrefix:  options.AddrPrefix,
				OfflineMode: options.OfflineMode,
			},
		),
	}
}
```

#### In-process Execution

> Rosetta API service could run within the same execution process of the application; new configuration option and command line flag would be provided:

Reviewer 2: Should state who would be providing the new configuration.

Reviewer: This work requires a number of changes to the Cosmos SDK codebase, including the default configuration for client apps. New command line flags need to be made available for command line utilities development.

     ....
            get contecxt, flags, etc
        	...
            
            h, err := service.New(
                service.Options{Port: config.Rosetta.Port},
                NewRosettaAPINetworkFromConfig(config),
            )
            if err != nil {
            }
            
            ...
            
            go func() {
			if err := h.Start(config); err != nil {
				errCh <- err
			}
		    }()
    }

```

#### Command Line Integration

Client application developers can write a new command to launch a Rosetta API server as a separate process too:

```
func NewRosettaServiceCmd() *cobra.Command {

    ...
    cmd := &cobra.Command{
    	Use:   "vote [proposal-id] [option]",
        ....
        
		RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
            ....
            get contecxt, flags, etc
        	...
            
            h, err := service.New(
                service.Options{Port: config.Rosetta.Port},
                NewRosettaAPINetworkFromConfig(config),
            )
            if err != nil {
            }
            
            ...
            
            h.Start()
        }
    }
    ...

}
```

### The external Library

> Because apart from the Network struct and Adapter implemention there is a lot of code that would be shared across versions, we can provide a repo for the Rosetta Service that will hold only the Service, the Interfaces and the types. This includes all that is not specific to a single version. (Still to decide if we keep an external shared dependency or not.)

Reviewer 2: If I recall from our conversation on Friday this was the point you wanted a decision upon? If so, I would suggest moving this up to the decision or the architecture section. I would also be more assertive about this. The proposed solution sounds good to make it the starting point for the discussion.

Reviewer: I agree with @SenorMonito here - plus, this should be rephrased IMvHO

## Status

Accepted

## Consequences

### Positive

> - Provide out-of-the-box Rosetta interface just by using the Cosmos SDK.
> - Contribute to the standarization of blockchain interfaces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Out-of-the-box Rosetta API support within Cosmos SDK.
- Blockchain interface standardisation
```

```
// NewNetwork returns the default application configuration.
func NewNetwork(options Options) service.Network {
	cosmosClient := cosmos.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.CosmosEndpoint))
	tendermintClient := tendermint.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.TendermintEndpoint))

	return service.Network{
		Properties: rosetta.NetworkProperties{
			Blockchain:          options.Blockchain,
			Network:             options.Network,
			SupportedOperations: []string{OperationTransfer},
		},
		Adapter: newAdapter(
			cosmosClient,
			tendermintClient,
			properties{
				Blockchain:  options.Blockchain,
				Network:     options.Network,
				AddrPrefix:  options.AddrPrefix,
				OfflineMode: options.OfflineMode,
			},
		),
	}
}
```

#### In-process Execution

Rosetta API service could run within the same execution process of the application; new configuration option and command line flag would be provided:

```
	if config.Rosetta.Enable {
     ....
            get contecxt, flags, etc
        	...
            
            h, err := service.New(
                service.Options{Port: config.Rosetta.Port},

>                 InitRosettaAPIFromConfig(),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                NewRosettaAPINetworkFromConfig(config),
```

            )
            if err != nil {
            }
            
            ...
            
            go func() {
			if err := h.Start(config); err != nil {
				errCh <- err
			}
		    }()
    }

```

#### Command Line Integration

> Client applications could write a new command to launch a Rosetta API server process:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Client application developers can write a new command to launch a Rosetta API server as a separate process too:
```

```
func NewRosettaServiceCmd() *cobra.Command {

    ...
    cmd := &cobra.Command{
    	Use:   "vote [proposal-id] [option]",
        ....
        
		RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
            ....
            get contecxt, flags, etc
        	...
            
            h, err := service.New(

>                 service.Options{Port: uint32(*flagPort)},

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                service.Options{Port: config.Rosetta.Port},
```

>                 NewNetwork(Options{
>                     CosmosEndpoint:     *flagAppRPC,
>                     TendermintEndpoint: *flagTendermintRPC,
>                     Blockchain:         *flagBlockchain,
>                     Network:            *flagNetworkID,
>                     AddrPrefix:         *flagAddrPrefix,
>                     OfflineMode:        *flagOfflineMode,
>                 }),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                InitRosettaAPIFromConfig(),
```

```
// NewNetwork returns the default application configuration.
func NewNetwork(options Options) service.Network {
	cosmosClient := cosmos.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.CosmosEndpoint))
	tendermintClient := tendermint.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.TendermintEndpoint))

	return service.Network{
		Properties: rosetta.NetworkProperties{
			Blockchain:          options.Blockchain,
			Network:             options.Network,
			SupportedOperations: []string{OperationTransfer},
		},
		Adapter: newAdapter(
			cosmosClient,
			tendermintClient,
			properties{
				Blockchain:  options.Blockchain,
				Network:     options.Network,
				AddrPrefix:  options.AddrPrefix,
				OfflineMode: options.OfflineMode,
			},
		),
	}
}
```

#### In-process Execution

Rosetta API service could run within the same execution process of the application; new configuration option and command line flag would be provided:

```
	if config.Rosetta.Enable {
     ....
            get contecxt, flags, etc
        	...
            
            h, err := service.New(

>                 service.Options{Port: uint32(*flagPort)},

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                service.Options{Port: config.Rosetta.Port},
```

# ADR 035: Rosetta API support

## Context

Rosetta API, an open-source specification and set of tools developed by Coinbase, makes integration with blockchains simpler, faster, and more reliable by establishing a standard API for integrating blockchain applications.

By using a common interface that standardizes the process of how a user interacts with a blockchain, both the work of exchanges to integrate with new blockchains and also of the developers to build cross-blockchain applications such as block explorers, wallets and dApps is considerably reduced.

## Decision

We think that providing Rosetta support to the Cosmos SDK will add value to all the developers and Cosmos SDK based chains in the ecosystem.

## Architecture

> The service is structured in a way that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The driving principles of the proposed design follow:
```

> 1. It becomes easy to inject different implementations for different types of SDK. For this abstraction we have used the term Adapter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Developer-friendliness: it must be as riskless and painless as possible for client applications developers to extend network configurations to expose Rosetta API-compliant services.
```

> 2. Due to the nature of versioning that has been done with Cosmos SDK so far it becomes very difficult to have different SDK versions included in the same repo, for that we created a generic shared code that includes the Service and the Adapter interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Long term support: developers build applications on the various stable branches of Cosmos SDK. This proposal aims to provide support for all the release series supported by the Cosmos SDK team.
```

> 3. It is easy to inject and instantiate wherever is needed in the different applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Cost-efficiency: backporting features from `master` to the various stable branches of Cosmos SDK is a cost that needs to be reduced.
```

```
type NetworkProperties struct {
	// Mandatory properties
	Blockchain          string
	Network             string
	AddrPrefix          string
	SupportedOperations []string
}
```

Rosetta API services use Blockchain and Network as identifiers, e.g. the developers of gaia, the application that powers the Cosmos Hub, may want to set those to Cosmos Hub and cosmos-hub-3 respectively.

`AddrPrefix` contains the network-specific address prefix. Cosmos SDK base implementations will default to `cosmos`, client applications are instructed that this should be changed according to their network configuration.

`SupportedOperations` contains the transaction types that are supported by the library. At the present time, only `Transfer` is supported.

`Network` holds an `Adapter` reference too. Adapter implementations may vary across different Cosmos SDK release series:

```
type Adapter interface {
	DataAPI
	ConstructionAPI
}

type DataAPI interface {
	server.NetworkAPIServicer
	server.AccountAPIServicer
	server.MempoolAPIServicer
	server.BlockAPIServicer
	server.ConstructionAPIServicer
}

type ConstructionAPI interface {
	server.ConstructionAPIServicer
}

````

### Cosmos SDK Integration

> Cosmos SDK provides a base `Network` struct so that it could serve as code example for client application developers and testing tool to be used in conjuction with `simd`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cosmos SDK provides a base `Network` struct and a `NewNetwork` constructors so that they could serve as code example for client application developers and testing tool to be used in conjuction with `simd`.
```

```
// NewNetwork returns the default application configuration.
func NewNetwork(options Options) service.Network {
	cosmosClient := cosmos.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.CosmosEndpoint))
	tendermintClient := tendermint.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.TendermintEndpoint))

	return service.Network{
		Properties: rosetta.NetworkProperties{
			Blockchain:          options.Blockchain,
			Network:             options.Network,
			SupportedOperations: []string{OperationTransfer},
		},
		Adapter: newAdapter(
			cosmosClient,
			tendermintClient,
			properties{
				Blockchain:  options.Blockchain,
				Network:     options.Network,
				AddrPrefix:  options.AddrPrefix,
				OfflineMode: options.OfflineMode,
			},
		),
	}
}
```

> #### In-process Execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### In-process Execution
```

Rosetta API service could run within the same execution process of the application; new configuration option and command line flag would be provided:

```
	if config.Rosetta.Enable {
     ....
            get contecxt, flags, etc
        	...
            
            h, err := service.New(
                service.Options{Port: uint32(*flagPort)},

>                 NewNetwork(Options{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                InitRosettaAPIFromConfig(Options{
```

>                     CosmosEndpoint:     *flagAppRPC,
>                     TendermintEndpoint: *flagTendermintRPC,
>                     Blockchain:         *flagBlockchain,
>                     Network:            *flagNetworkID,
>                     AddrPrefix:         *flagAddrPrefix,
>                     OfflineMode:        *flagOfflineMode,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>                 }),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

            )
            if err != nil {
            }
            
            ...
            
            go func() {
			if err := h.Start(config); err != nil {
				errCh <- err
			}
		    }()
    }

```

> #### The cobra command approach

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Command Line Integration
```

> This means providing a new command in order to run the service, an example can look something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Client applications could write a new command to launch a Rosetta API server process:
```

```
func NewRosettaServiceCmd() *cobra.Command {

    ...
    cmd := &cobra.Command{
    	Use:   "vote [proposal-id] [option]",
        ....
        
		RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
            ....
            get contecxt, flags, etc
        	...
            
            h, err := service.New(
                service.Options{Port: uint32(*flagPort)},
                NewNetwork(Options{
                    CosmosEndpoint:     *flagAppRPC,
                    TendermintEndpoint: *flagTendermintRPC,
                    Blockchain:         *flagBlockchain,
                    Network:            *flagNetworkID,
                    AddrPrefix:         *flagAddrPrefix,
                    OfflineMode:        *flagOfflineMode,
                }),
            )
            if err != nil {
            }
            
            ...
            
            h.Start()
        }
    }
    ...

}
```

> This is closer to the Standalone approach. Right now in the current implementation we have a main.go that can be run as a Standalone, this probably will be removed once we migrate the code from Tendermint repo an embed it in Cosmos SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

}

type DataAPI interface {
	server.NetworkAPIServicer
	server.AccountAPIServicer
	server.MempoolAPIServicer
	server.BlockAPIServicer
	server.ConstructionAPIServicer
}

type ConstructionAPI interface {
	server.ConstructionAPIServicer
}

````

### Cosmos SDK Integration

Cosmos SDK provides a base `Network` struct so that it could serve as code example for client application developers and testing tool to be used in conjuction with `simd`.

```
// NewNetwork returns the default application configuration.
func NewNetwork(options Options) service.Network {
	cosmosClient := cosmos.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.CosmosEndpoint))
	tendermintClient := tendermint.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.TendermintEndpoint))

	return service.Network{
		Properties: rosetta.NetworkProperties{
			Blockchain:          options.Blockchain,
			Network:             options.Network,
			SupportedOperations: []string{OperationTransfer},
		},
		Adapter: newAdapter(
			cosmosClient,
			tendermintClient,
			properties{
				Blockchain:  options.Blockchain,
				Network:     options.Network,
				AddrPrefix:  options.AddrPrefix,
				OfflineMode: options.OfflineMode,
			},
		),
	}
}
```

> 
> As we see we hold not only the instantiation of a Launchpad specific network but the adapter implementation too. As the way to talk to different rpc endpoint change between different versions (Launchpad, Stargate, etc), makes sense to keep it in their respective branches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Cosmos SDK provides a base `Network` struct so that it could serve as code example for client application developers and testing tool to be used in conjuction with `simd`.

```
// NewNetwork returns the default application configuration.
func NewNetwork(options Options) service.Network {
	cosmosClient := cosmos.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.CosmosEndpoint))
	tendermintClient := tendermint.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.TendermintEndpoint))

	return service.Network{
		Properties: rosetta.NetworkProperties{
			Blockchain:          options.Blockchain,
			Network:             options.Network,
			SupportedOperations: []string{OperationTransfer},
		},
		Adapter: newAdapter(
			cosmosClient,
			tendermintClient,
			properties{
				Blockchain:  options.Blockchain,
				Network:     options.Network,
				AddrPrefix:  options.AddrPrefix,
				OfflineMode: options.OfflineMode,
			},
		),
	}
}
```

As we see we hold not only the instantiation of a Launchpad specific network but the adapter implementation too. As the way to talk to different rpc endpoint change between different versions (Launchpad, Stargate, etc), makes sense to keep it in their respective branches.

> In this way we could have two options (yet to decide) that we can expose rosetta in the cosmos SDK.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```
// NewNetwork returns the default application configuration.
func NewNetwork(options Options) service.Network {
	cosmosClient := cosmos.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.CosmosEndpoint))
	tendermintClient := tendermint.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.TendermintEndpoint))

	return service.Network{
		Properties: rosetta.NetworkProperties{
			Blockchain:          options.Blockchain,
			Network:             options.Network,
			SupportedOperations: []string{OperationTransfer},
		},
		Adapter: newAdapter(
			cosmosClient,
			tendermintClient,
			properties{
				Blockchain:  options.Blockchain,
				Network:     options.Network,
				AddrPrefix:  options.AddrPrefix,
				OfflineMode: options.OfflineMode,
			},
		),
	}
}
```

As we see we hold not only the instantiation of a Launchpad specific network but the adapter implementation too. As the way to talk to different rpc endpoint change between different versions (Launchpad, Stargate, etc), makes sense to keep it in their respective branches.

In this way we could have two options (yet to decide) that we can expose rosetta in the cosmos SDK.

#### In-process Execution.

> This will look more like the approach the API in cosmos works: [link](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/ca7b31dd5d23b10a919de1a60bbac90e89c5bf78/server/start.go#L248).
> 
> So we can add something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rosetta API service could run within the same execution process of the application; new configuration option and command line flag would be provided:
```

                service.Options{Port: uint32(*flagPort)},
                NewNetwork(Options{
                    CosmosEndpoint:     *flagAppRPC,
                    TendermintEndpoint: *flagTendermintRPC,
                    Blockchain:         *flagBlockchain,
                    Network:            *flagNetworkID,
                    AddrPrefix:         *flagAddrPrefix,
                    OfflineMode:        *flagOfflineMode,
                }),
            )
            if err != nil {
            }
            
            ...
            
            go func() {
			if err := h.Start(config); err != nil {
				errCh <- err
			}
		    }()
    }

```

#### The cobra command approach

This means providing a new command in order to run the service, an example can look something like:

```
func NewRosettaServiceCmd() *cobra.Command {

    ...
    cmd := &cobra.Command{
    	Use:   "vote [proposal-id] [option]",
        ....
        
		RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
            ....
            get contecxt, flags, etc
        	...
            
            h, err := service.New(
                service.Options{Port: uint32(*flagPort)},

>                 launchpad.NewLaunchpadNetwork(launchpad.Options{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                NewNetwork(Options{
```

# ADR 035: Rosetta API Support

## Context

[Rosetta API](https://www.rosetta-api.org/) is an open-source specification and set of tools developed by Coinbase to standardise blockchain interactions.

Through the use of a standard API for integrating blockchain applications it will

* Be easier for a user to interact with a given blockchain
* Allow exchanges to integrate new blockchains quickly and easily
* Enable application developers to build cross-blockchain applications such as block explorers, wallets and dApps at considerably lower cost and effort.

## Decision

It is clear that adding Rosetta API support to the Cosmos SDK will bring value to all the developers and Cosmos SDK based chains in the ecosystem. How it is implemented is key.

The driving principles of the proposed design are:

1. **Extensibility:** it must be as riskless and painless as possible for application developers to set-up network configurations to expose Rosetta API-compliant services.

> 2. **Long term support:** This proposal aims to provide support for all the supported Cosmos SDK release series.

Reviewer 3: What's a release series? It's not clear from this statement which exact versions you plan on backporting this functionality to.

Reviewer: 0.40.1 -> release series is `0.40`
0.40.2 -> release series is `0.40`
0.39.1 -> release series is `0.39`

[so on and so forth]

Reviewer 3: And how far back?

Reviewer: We originally planned to deliver support for historical data as well (meaning: 0.37). As you may imagine, that's low priority at the moment though.

> 3. **Cost-efficiency:** Backporting features from `master` to the various stable branches of Cosmos SDK is a cost that needs to be reduced.

Reviewer 3: What does this have to do with Rosetta? Do you mean Rosetta features?

Reviewer: Yep!

Reviewer 3: Can you state that?

Reviewer: Hold on - these are just principles. What exactly do you reckon should be changed?

Reviewer 3: `Backporting Rosetta features...`

Reviewer: Thanks, it's much clearer now and yes, I believe we all are on the same page here.

> (I have no idea what features)

Good point - it's not about *features*, Rosetta API specifications are quite new and as such they tend to change often. We expect various changes to the specifications to come through in the following months. Backports of such features would need to be provided and that's what we are trying to avoid here.

If you are OK with that, I'd move on amending the text.

> This ADR will describe how this will be achieved.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will achieve these delivering on these principles by the following:
```

1. There will be an external repo called [cosmos-rosetta-gateway](https://github.com/tendermint/cosmos-rosetta-gateway) for the implementation of the core Rosetta API features, particularly:
   a. The types and interfaces. This separates design from implementation detail.
   b. Some core implementations: specifically, the `Service` functionality as this is independent of the Cosmos SDK version.
2. Due to differences between the Cosmos release series, each series will have its own specific API implementations of `Network` struct and `Adapter` interface.
3. There will be two options for starting an API service in applications:
   a. API shares the application process

>    b. API-specific process.

Reviewer 3: Neat, this would be useful 👍

> This document below will describe each design component of the proposed architecture.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document below will describe each design component of the proposed architecture.
```
```suggestion
```

## Architecture

> ### 1. The External Repo

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### The External Repo
```

As section will describe the proposed external library, including the service implementation, plus the defined types and interfaces.

#### Service

`Service` is a simple `struct` that is started and listens to the port specified in the options. This is meant to be used across all the Cosmos SDK versions that are actively supported.

The constructor follows:

`func New(options Options, network Network) (*Service, error)`

#### Types

> The Service accepts an `Options` `struct` that holds service configuration values, such as the port the service would be listening to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Service` accepts an `Options` `struct` that holds service configuration values, such as the port the service would be listening to:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```golang
```

type Options struct {

> 	Port uint32

Reviewer 3: Why not just provide a listen address? This is typically what you do. In addition, these options can be extended to provide CORS, HTTP w/r timeouts, etc...

Author: Right! Good point.

}
```

The `Network` type holds network-specific properties (i.e. configuration values) and adapters. Pre-configured concrete types will be available for each Cosmos SDK release. Applications can also create their own custom types.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```golang
```

type Network struct {
	Properties rosetta.NetworkProperties
	Adapter    rosetta.Adapter
}
```

A `NetworkProperties` `struct` comprises basic values that are required by a Rosetta API `Service`:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```golang
```

type NetworkProperties struct {
	// Mandatory properties
	Blockchain          string

> 	Network             string

Reviewer 3: It's not clear to me the difference between these two values. Perhaps expand upon this and add concrete examples.

Reviewer: Those're label pairs used by Rosetta API to identify networks. Either should be chain-id. Examples:

* `cosmos` - `cosmoshub-3`
* `tendermint` - `cosmoshub-3`
* `cosmoshub` - `cosmoshub-3`
* `cosmos` - `akash-1`

etc..

We need to agree on semantics here.

Author: Yeah, this is specific to Rosetta spec. They offer as an example "Bitcoin"/"mainnet".

Reviewer 3: You should probably provide an example in the ADR 👍

Reviewer: We thought line 78 could serve as an example

	AddrPrefix          string
	SupportedOperations []string
}
```

Rosetta API services use Blockchain and Network as identifiers, e.g. the developers of gaia, the application that powers the Cosmos Hub, may want to set those to Cosmos Hub and cosmos-hub-3 respectively.

> `AddrPrefix` contains the network-specific address prefix. Cosmos SDK base implementations will default to `cosmos`, client applications should change this according to their network configuration.

Reviewer 3: Technically, this should be bech32 prefix.

Author: I am gonna rename it to Bech32Prefix.

> `SupportedOperations` contains the transaction types that are supported by the library. At the present time, only `Transfer` is supported. Additional operations will be added in due time.

Reviewer 3: How are exactly these maintained and mapped? Are they completely arbitrary?

Author: This is another spec property, in the endpoint for network/options we offer which operations we support. The naming is arbitrary, meaning that is not enforced any specific name. 

This makes Coinbase know which operation types are supported and which ones it can generate. At the same time, the api fails if a transaction that is not supported is sent to it.

There is no direct mapping so even if we have it implemented for the users to use, they can decide to those tx types they don't want to expose. (Imagine a Delegate tx type, which @sahith-narahari is working on supporting)

Reviewer 3: Right, but the names are arbitrary. How do they map to message types? Why not just use the fully qualified protocol buffer message names? "delegate" is too ambiguous.

#### Interfaces

`Network` holds an `Adapter` reference too. Each Cosmos SDK release series will have their own Adapter implementations. Developers can implement their own custom adapters as required.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```golang
```

> `Network` holds an `Adapter` reference too. Each Cosmos SDK release series will have their own Adapter implementations. Developers can implement their own custom adapters as required.

Reviewer 3: Describe the what and why first.

type Adapter interface {
	DataAPI
	ConstructionAPI
}

type DataAPI interface {
	server.NetworkAPIServicer
	server.AccountAPIServicer
	server.MempoolAPIServicer
	server.BlockAPIServicer
	server.ConstructionAPIServicer
}

type ConstructionAPI interface {
	server.ConstructionAPIServicer
}
```

### 2. Cosmos SDK Implementation

As described, each Cosmos SDK release series will have version specific implementations of `Network` and `Adapter`, as well as a `NewNetwork` constructor.

Due to separation of interface and implementation, application developers have the option to override as needed, using this code as reference.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```golang
```

// NewNetwork returns the default application configuration.

func NewNetwork(options Options) service.Network {
	cosmosClient := cosmos.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.CosmosEndpoint))
	tendermintClient := tendermint.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.TendermintEndpoint))

	return service.Network{
		Properties: rosetta.NetworkProperties{
			Blockchain:          options.Blockchain,
			Network:             options.Network,
			SupportedOperations: []string{OperationTransfer},
		},
		Adapter: newAdapter(
			cosmosClient,
			tendermintClient,
			properties{
				Blockchain:  options.Blockchain,
				Network:     options.Network,
				AddrPrefix:  options.AddrPrefix,
				OfflineMode: options.OfflineMode,
			},
		),
	}
}
```

### 3. API service invocation

As stated at the start, application developers will have two methods for invocation of the Rosetta API service:

1. Shared process for both application and API
2. Standalone API service

#### Shared Process

Rosetta API service could run within the same execution process as the application. New configuration option and command line flags would be provided to support this:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```golang
```

	if config.Rosetta.Enable {

>      ....

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// ....
```

            get contecxt, flags, etc
        	...
            
            h, err := service.New(
                service.Options{Port: config.Rosetta.Port},
                NewRosettaAPINetworkFromConfig(config),
            )
            if err != nil {
            }
            
            ...
            
            go func() {
			if err := h.Start(config); err != nil {
				errCh <- err
			}
		    }()
    }

```

#### Separate API service

Client application developers can write a new command to launch a Rosetta API server as a separate process too:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```golang
```

#### Service

`Service` is a simple `struct` that is started and listens to the port specified in the options. This is meant to be used across all the Cosmos SDK versions that are actively supported.

The constructor follows:

`func New(options Options, network Network) (*Service, error)`

#### Types

`Service` accepts an `Options` `struct` that holds service configuration values, such as the port the service would be listening to:

```golang
type Options struct {
	Port uint32
}
```

The `Network` type holds network-specific properties (i.e. configuration values) and adapters. Pre-configured concrete types will be available for each Cosmos SDK release. Applications can also create their own custom types.

```golang
type Network struct {
	Properties rosetta.NetworkProperties
	Adapter    rosetta.Adapter
}
```

A `NetworkProperties` `struct` comprises basic values that are required by a Rosetta API `Service`:

```golang
type NetworkProperties struct {
	// Mandatory properties
	Blockchain          string
	Network             string
	SupportedOperations []string
}
```

> Rosetta API services use Blockchain and Network as identifiers, e.g. the developers of gaia, the application that powers the Cosmos Hub, may want to set those to Cosmos Hub and cosmos-hub-3 respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rosetta API services use Blockchain and Network as identifiers, e.g. the developers of gaia, the application that powers the Cosmos Hub, may want to set those to `Cosmos Hub` and `cosmos-hub-3` respectively.
```

> Rosetta API services use Blockchain and Network as identifiers, e.g. the developers of gaia, the application that powers the Cosmos Hub, may want to set those to `Cosmos Hub` and `cosmos-hub-3` respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rosetta API services use `Blockchain` and `Network` as identifiers, e.g. the developers of _gaia_, the application that powers the Cosmos Hub, may want to set those to `Cosmos Hub` and `cosmos-hub-3` respectively.
```

`SupportedOperations` contains the transaction types that are supported by the library. At the present time, only `Transfer` is supported. Additional operations will be added in due time.

> We will map Msg type name as the operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will map `Msg` type name as the operation.
```

# ADR 035: Rosetta API Support

## Context

[Rosetta API](https://www.rosetta-api.org/) is an open-source specification and set of tools developed by Coinbase to standardise blockchain interactions.

Through the use of a standard API for integrating blockchain applications it will

* Be easier for a user to interact with a given blockchain
* Allow exchanges to integrate new blockchains quickly and easily
* Enable application developers to build cross-blockchain applications such as block explorers, wallets and dApps at considerably lower cost and effort.

## Decision

It is clear that adding Rosetta API support to the Cosmos SDK will bring value to all the developers and Cosmos SDK based chains in the ecosystem. How it is implemented is key.

The driving principles of the proposed design are:

1. **Extensibility:** it must be as riskless and painless as possible for application developers to set-up network configurations to expose Rosetta API-compliant services.
2. **Long term support:** This proposal aims to provide support for all the supported Cosmos SDK release series.

> 3. **Cost-efficiency:** Backporting features from `master` to the various stable branches of Cosmos SDK is a cost that needs to be reduced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Cost-efficiency:** Backporting changes to Rosetta API specifications from `master` to the various stable branches of Cosmos SDK is a cost that needs to be reduced.
```

`SupportedOperations` contains the transaction types that are supported by the library. At the present time, 
only `cosmos-sdk/MsgSend` is supported in Launchpad. Additional operations will be added in due time.

For Launchpad we will map the amino type name to the operation supported, in Stargate we will use the protoc one.

#### Interfaces

Every SDK version uses a different format to connect (rpc, gRpc, etc), we have abstracted this in what is called the 
Adapter. This is an interface that defines the methods an adapter implementation must provide in order to be used 
in the `Network` interface.

Each Cosmos SDK release series will have their own Adapter implementations.
Developers can implement their own custom adapters as required.

```golang
type Adapter interface {
	DataAPI
	ConstructionAPI
}

type DataAPI interface {
	server.NetworkAPIServicer
	server.AccountAPIServicer
	server.MempoolAPIServicer
	server.BlockAPIServicer
	server.ConstructionAPIServicer
}

type ConstructionAPI interface {

> 	server.ConstructionAPIServicer

Reviewer 4: Where are these interfaces documented?

Reviewer: CC'ing @jgimeno

Author: This interfaces are the ones that are defined in the rosetta-sdk which is the base code that coinbase offered, we could define our interfaces but would be like too much indirection.

Reviewer: I'd advise to just drop a permalink to Coinbase's documentation.

Reviewer: Done in https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/7492/files#r518107958

Hence resolving this comment. @aaronc reopen if you're not happy about it.

}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For further information about the `Servicer` interfaces, please refer to the [Coinbase's rosetta-sdk-go's documentation](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/coinbase/rosetta-sdk-go@v0.5.9/server).

```

### 2. Cosmos SDK Implementation

As described, each Cosmos SDK release series will have version specific implementations of `Network` and `Adapter`, as 
well as a `NewNetwork` constructor.

Due to separation of interface and implementation, application developers have the option to override as needed, 
using this code as reference.

```golang
// NewNetwork returns the default application configuration.

func NewNetwork(options Options) service.Network {
	cosmosClient := cosmos.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.CosmosEndpoint))
	tendermintClient := tendermint.NewClient(fmt.Sprintf("http://%s", options.TendermintEndpoint))

> 	return service.Network{

Reviewer 4: This diverges from the constructor defined above

Reviewer: @jgimeno bump

Reviewer: @aaronc True that, yet this is an example, i.e. the actual code would diverge slightly between 0.39 and 0.40 - as described in the comment above: `each Cosmos SDK release series will have version specific implementations of Network and Adapter, as well as a NewNetwork constructor.`

For instance, that's the signature of this very constructor for Stargate:

```
NewNetwork(cdc codec.BinaryMarshaler, options Options) service.Network
```

The constructor's signature for Launchpad follows:

```
NewNetwork(cdc *codec.Codec, options Options) service.Network
```

I hope this helps.

		Properties: rosetta.NetworkProperties{
			Blockchain:          options.Blockchain,
			Network:             options.Network,
			SupportedOperations: []string{OperationTransfer},
		},
		Adapter: newAdapter(
			cosmosClient,
			tendermintClient,
			properties{
				Blockchain:   options.Blockchain,
				Network:      options.Network,
				OfflineMode:  options.OfflineMode,
			},

> 		),

Reviewer 4: Is there an example of the adapter that should be linked to in this ADR for reference?

Reviewer: @jgimeno bump

Author: We can use the one for launchpad, but is in a branch and not merged yet. Is that ok?

Reviewer: Yes, go ahead @jgimeno. Use a permalink

Author: https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/eeb4c537fbcd9f974360b248145718b476073209/server/rosetta/launchpad.go#L75

This is the adapter constructor in the launchpad implementation, but the implementation itself is based in several files.

Reviewer: The team is finalising the Stargate's `Adapter` implementation. I think we can show some simplified code example here?

Reviewer: It does not have to be complete - this is an ADR after all, not a code walkthrough. Either some pseudo code or a code snippet should it.

Adapter. This is an interface that defines the methods an adapter implementation must provide in order to be used 
in the `Network` interface.

Each Cosmos SDK release series will have their own Adapter implementations.
Developers can implement their own custom adapters as required.

```golang
type Adapter interface {
	DataAPI
	ConstructionAPI
}

type DataAPI interface {
	server.NetworkAPIServicer
	server.AccountAPIServicer
	server.MempoolAPIServicer
	server.BlockAPIServicer
	server.ConstructionAPIServicer
}

type ConstructionAPI interface {
	server.ConstructionAPIServicer
}
```

For further information about the `Servicer` interfaces, please refer to the [Coinbase's rosetta-sdk-go's documentation](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/coinbase/rosetta-sdk-go@v0.5.9/server).

### 2. Cosmos SDK Implementation

As described, each Cosmos SDK release series will have version specific implementations of `Network` and `Adapter`, as 
well as a `NewNetwork` constructor.

Due to separation of interface and implementation, application developers have the option to override as needed, 
using this code as reference.

```golang
// NewNetwork returns the default application configuration.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# ADR 035: Rosetta API Support

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Authors:

- Jonathan Gimeno (@jgimeno)
- David Grierson (@senormonito)
- Alessio Treglia (@alessio)

```

# ADR 035: Rosetta API Support

> ## Authors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Authors
```
